---
layout: post
title: RubyConf 2009
date: 2009-12-01
comments: true
categories: [Ruby, Conference]
---

Attending RubyConf was a lot of fun because I was able to combine a personal vacation ahead of the trip, then meet my coworker at the start of the conference and get down to business. My coworker had scheduled a dinner meetup with the founders of Get Satisfaction and I joined him and met them, and a couple other employees for dinner. I would have loved to check out the Twitter offices but we ran out of time.

Confreaks
---------
Conference sessions [are available free online](http://rubyconf2009.confreaks.com/) thanks to Confreaks. Confreaks makes high-quality recordings that include video of the presenter and the slides in one frame. Unfortunately I lost my notes so I'll be writing from memory (nearly a year later) about sessions I liked, skipping sessions I didn't care for.

Sessions
--------
I attended Tom Preston-Werner's session on BERT and Ernie. The gist I got was that Github has multiple services as part of its infrastructure comprised of multiple programming language environments (Erlang for example). They serialize data as binary data to move it between systems. The tools he mentioned are good ways to do that. I compared this to JSON serialization between Ruby and JavaScript back-end and front-end, roughly speaking.

Flying Robot: using Arduino for unmanned aerial vehicles. This was the first demonstration in person I'd seen of a project using the [Arduino library](http://www.arduino.cc/) which lets you work with electronics in Ruby code, and simplifies working with electronics for beginners and hobbyists. I think this topic is a big hit with web programmers who typically don't get to work with hardware. The presenters flew their blimp around the room.

NoSQL talk with Ben Scofield. I had seen the majority of this talk at WindyCityRails just a couple months prior, but it was an opportunity to look at document-oriented datastores and other datastores that do not use SQL. I have yet to use one of these in a project, but I can see the speed advantage in the prototyping stage of not having to worry about relationships (for the document stores). I can also see the speed advantage of simpler key value stores like Redis written in C.

Ruby Game Development with Jemini, I did not attend this talk but did play with their game in the hotel lobby, it was well done! I attended Yehuda's talk on RubyGems.

Lightning talks: I love these. Had to cut out early but they are always a fun way to pick up some tips.

Gemcutter: I attended Nick Quaranto's talk on Gemcutter and learned about the back story. It was interesting and it is a great project and very easy to use.

MacRuby: Laurent Sansonetti presented MacRuby, which is an exciting project for desktop Cocoa application development. I haven't built an application with it but it looks like fun.

SOLID Ruby: Jim Weirich is a great instructor and presenter. He is dynamic and makes the content feel urgent, relevant, and exciting. His talk looked at some principles for writing better code.

Rippin' off Python: Chris Wanstrath looked at some nice features and design decisions from Python and proposed introducing some of them to Ruby.

Mobile Applications with Ruby was a presentation given by Sarah Allen. I didn't attend it but met her and a friend of hers in the hotel lobby and they were very nice. Instead I attended "Synchronous Reads, Asynchronous Writes" given by Paul Dix. Paul seemed to very interested in high performance queue based systems and data analysis, this talk was interesting. Paul has since released a book called [Service-oriented design with Ruby on Rails](http://www.amazon.com/Service-Oriented-Design-Rails-Addison-Wesley-Professional/dp/0321659368/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1285179039&sr=8-1) that looks very interesting.

On the Edge of Rails Performance was the last talk of the day I attended, with Gregg Pollack. Gregg gives excellent presentations that are visually rich while still emphasizing the content. He had a number of great recommendations for scaling an app and looked at some of the new features in Rails 3.

Burlingame
----------
The conference was not actually in the city, but held in Burlingame near the SFO airport, which was a surprise to me upon arrival. This made it challenging and more expensive to get into the city, but I was able to split cab fare with some others and make it happen. 

Startup Crawl in SF
-------------------
A highlight of the conference was the first ever Startup Crawl where various startup companies in SOMA and South Park area opened up their office doors. I got to see the offices of Scribd, Pivotal Labs, Engine Yard, Yammer, ZenDesk, Heroku and more. It was also fun to be able to attend a Github drinkup, where I met Chris Wanstrath and others. I caught up with Leah Culver and met Cal Henderson (formerly Flickr) and talked with them about their projects. I also met a guy working for [Image Movers Digital](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ImageMovers_Digital) (acquired by Walt Disney) who had worked as an animator on the animated "Christmas Carol" movie with Jim Carrey.

A great visit to SF, nice vacation, nice conference, enjoying meeting people, looking forward to doing it again!
